---
layout: post
author: Gordon White
title: Chaos Protocols (Excerpt)
css_hook: post
tags: [Finance]

---

The American Dream Is an Advertising Campaign. We have convinced ourselves that the brief twenty years after the war were a state of normalcy, when America was in its industrial ascendance and all its competitors lay in smoky ruins, their work forces dead on battlefields or burnt to ash in concentration camps.

Unencumbered growth was there for the taking. Politicians win elections by promising a return to this world of the postwar dream state.

Viewed over the lifetime of the country, however, you can see it is not the norm—it is a unique, lucky aberration. Think of it like assuming your normal life is drinking cocktails on the beach because of those two weeks you spent in Cancun a few years ago.

The postwar era was characterized by rapid economic growth driven by industrial expansion rather than consumption, universal employment, free education, and above all is the “holy of holies” we are told we desire: property ownership. Let us be completely clear as to why hundreds of millions of dollars of advertising have been spent over three generations to convince us that property is a good investment: so banks can sell mortgages and governments can print GDP growth. The End. The rest of it, like “putting down roots” or “having an investment” is genuinely all advertising, as evidenced by your Pavlovian outrage as you read these words. Triggering an emotional attachment to mortgage debt had the beneficial side effect of anchoring an industrial workforce around a manufacturing base, and a drive through the outlying suburbs of today’s Detroit should indicate how successful this was. Encouraging an ownership society was not a scam, however. Much like the Central Banking and Warfare model, it worked quite well for a couple of decades. The housing industry contributed around 20 percent to GDP through real bank profits, construction, and the creation and purchase of all the things you put in a house: fridges, couches, and so on.

The fractional reserve banking system created by those goldsmiths and jewelers centuries before allowed for capital to centralize around worthwhile investments. Your relationship to the bank was relationship-based: the bank would assess whether you were a good investment and whether you would both make money. As long as mortgages were kept at a ratio of between two and three times your annual salary and energy remained cheap enough to commute in from the suburbs and first time buyers made up at least 40 percent of all sales and as long as the economy provided the volume of stable jobs needed to support the mortgage approvals, then the whole system working together was very beneficial. But which part of the picture I have just painted looks like today’s world? Before we answer that, we need to pinpoint the major turning point in the system, precisely when things began to go awry. In the 1970s, the concept of securitization was introduced into the mortgage system. Simply speaking, a security is a claim on a future payment of money. So a mortgage backed security is a claim on the future payments from a bundle of hundreds or thousands of individual mortgages. Banks began selling these to other banks, pension funds, and other financial institutions.

From this point, the prospective American homeowner became doubly useful. Firstly there was the GDP impact of the growing housing market. Secondly—and significantly more profitably for the financial industry—an individual mortgage was no longer seen as something a bank sold the way a baker sells bread. Individual mortgages became the “wheat” that became the flour that became the bread that gave the bank its profits. Banking moved from being relationship-based (which enabled real investment in a real economy) to being transactional; bankers changed from being investors to brokers. Bundling up mortgages into financial instruments was not some conspiracy perpetrated by a cabal of cigar-smoking New Yorkers. (That came later with the bank bail-outs and the avoidance of jail time.) In the short term, “securitization” did something remarkable. It allowed poorer people to buy houses because the banks could spread these riskier mortgages in amongst lower risk ones and then make enough money off the bundle of mortgages to offer loans to more poor people. The intention was almost laudable: find a way to remove risk from offering loans to low-income customers so that more people might be able to own their own home. But what is it they say about the road to Hell and good intentions? Pouring so much extra demand into the housing market was like pouring fuel on a fire. Prices took off, causing people to take out bigger and bigger mortgages, which made the debt/assets ever more valuable to the banks as they financialized them into derivatives and mortgage backed securities. We went too far. By a long way. As we all know now, giving second interest-only mortgages to the permanently unemployed for houses that were already over-valued who were living in economically depressed areas broke the entire world.

By 2008, the financial instruments that had been built on these bad mortgages—and more importantly the derivatives that were constructed around them—were technically worth dozens of times more than the entire planet’s economic output. When this whole monstrous zeppelin came crashing back down to earth, two things happened that nobody likes to talk about: the banks were bailed out of all their defaulted mortgages by the taxpayer, and they also reclaimed the houses of those who could no longer pay. It was a win-win. In the meantime, millions of Americans were forced from their homes and of those who stayed, just under half were stuck paying mortgages that were worth more than the value of their houses. Ten million jobs were lost and the banks received $11 trillion in bailouts. It is worth noting that the total mortgage debt of the United States at the time was approximately $9 trillion. It would have been cheaper for the taxpayer to pay off every single mortgage in the country and let the banks who placed dodgy bets fail. Go ahead and let that sink in. The results of all these misdealings are plainly evident.

According to the Brookings Institute, the nation’s poor are now more likely to be found in the suburbs than in inner cities or regional areas.6 With the evaporation of well-paying jobs and the increasing cost of energy—the cost of the average daily commute climbed 50 percent between 2005 and 2012—millions of Americans are now trapped in a new form of debt feudalism.7 It is too expensive to travel for better paying jobs, and the ones available locally pay considerably less than before the crash. Forty-nine million Americans are now classed as “food insecure.”8 In today’s housing market, properties that are worth more than a million dollars are selling at an increased rate of about 10 percent a year. Properties under $250,000—representing two-thirds of the total market—are declining by 12 percent year on year.9 RealtyTrac reported that 42.7 percent of all house sales in the first quarter of 2014 were all-cash purchases … meaning no mortgage was required.10 Reading between the lines, what we definitely are not hearing here is the sound of young couples’ feet getting onto the property ladder. This is the sound of long-term investors chasing property prices to the moon where the average American cannot afford to follow. At the time of writing, first home buyer volumes have collapsed to 27-year lows, and housing’s contribution to GDP is the lowest since the end of World War II. Despite all of this manipulation, financial destruction, and ruinous amounts of personal debt, Americans continue to believe that property ownership is the best possible investment. And yet, according to the Washington Post, home ownership yielded only 0.3 percent per year over the last century when you remove inflation.

In that same period, the S&P 500 has yielded 6.5 percent per year. Here we return to how economics is mostly about what is going on inside your head, rather than what is going on in the economy. Not only do we completely misunderstand how inflation works by failing to make the connection between the prices we pay in the supermarket and the asking price a realtor will quote us, we have been trained to value home ownership as an indicator of security and adulthood even though anyone on the Nobel committee will tell us otherwise. This value is arbitrary. It is crucially important to realise that the desire for property ownership is emotional rather than strategic because in almost all areas of the country it is little more than an inflation hedge, not the supreme wealth-creating investment we wish it to be. And it is only an inflation hedge if you do not buy “too much” house and get stuck servicing too large a mortgage. When you stop and view property-mania on a long enough timeline, this all starts to make sense. Pretty much since we started building houses about ten thousand years ago, they have been multi-generational dwellings. However, in the latter half of the twentieth century, we were told we could keep three households solvent—grandparents, parents, and you—where previously we only had to keep the one solvent. The economics underpinning this gamble—and it was a gamble—are only becoming evident now as the third generation looks around and finds housing unaffordable. Single-generation, owner-occupied dwellings are an eyeblink in the history of the human race, not an eternal condition. Find a better way.

## Capitalism’s “Bug”

It may surprise you to realise that we do not have a lot of clean data about how “normal” capitalism works. We keep having to suspend so-called true capitalism to go and fight wars, collapse empires, incorporate other genders into the work force, create fiat currencies, default on our government bonds, and rebuild entire continents. We are learning as we go along. We are not even really sure what triggered the particular brand of northern European capitalism that has been so successful in lifting billions of people out of poverty over the last two centuries, creating a global middle class. (Which isn’t to say it is perfect, obviously.)

The clue should have been in the name, but one of the key areas where we have limited insight is how capital—wealth in the form of money and physical assets that is available for investing—works over time. Much of this is down to our focus on credit. Credit or available debt is not inherently bad. Whilst “true capitalism” could otherwise be called “riskism” because it requires participants to put accrued capital at risk through investment, a functioning credit market enables current investment to be repaid with future profits. In the right scenario, this works exceptionally well. Credit and capital are the yin and yang of capitalism. Their interplay creates the entire universe and so developing an understanding of what they are and how they work is an essential step in recognising the bars of our black iron prison. According to Deirdre McClosky, the humanomist name-checked at the beginning of the chapter, it was a culture of celebrating innovation and inventors along with the above law changes that allowed northwest Europe and its colonies to pull ahead of the rest of the world.12 It certainly was not just available credit, which the Muslim world had been using for almost a thousand years.

Nor was it technical prowess as China had been significantly more technically advanced than Europe for the previous two thousand years. Nor was it the imperial project as the Mayan, Ottoman, and Mughal empires were all better established. (Empires enrich emperors. We stay poor. Just ask Dick Cheney.) Indeed, from a functional perspective, if you looked around the globe at the end of the Dark Ages, western Europe would have been the last place you would have chosen for an economic and cultural transformation. McClosky’s guess is as good as any. Whatever happened, it allowed personal capital to grow faster than it would through the simple re-investment of profit. She calls this the beginning of the Great Enrichment, the starting point of mankind’s build-out of a global middle class, an event that triggered the greatest ever decentralisation and creation of wealth ever. French economist du jour Thomas Piketty has studied the accumulation of capital in western countries over the last two centuries. Some surprising observations have come to light that appear to be features of capitalism rather than bugs. In the twentieth century it was largely hidden by the extreme re-organisation brought about by the Great Depression and World War II but in capitalist economies, capital accumulates over time in bigger and bigger amounts in smaller and smaller sets of hands. Piketty’s absolute numbers have been challenged because he failed to account for wealth transfers such as government payments and housing subsidies, a huge source of wealth for the lowest income brackets.

Drop them back into the metaphorical spreadsheet and much of the rate of change in wealth growth vanishes. However, the general trend of increasing wealth centralization is hard to argue against. The popular understanding of this is evidenced in the Occupy movement’s promotion of the idea of the 1 percent, a notion owing no small part to Piketty’s previous research. Whilst it is true that literally all of the economic gains since the 2008 crash have gone to the top 10 percent and most of this has gone to the top 1 percent, even these vanishingly small numbers of people hide quite how centralised global capital has become. Yes, the top 10 percent take home 50 percent of the country’s income … indeed it is the only part of the economy whose income growth has exceeded inflation over the last four decades. But measuring the 1/99 percents on income rather than capital—that is, money earned rather than wealth owned—is what everybody but Thomas Piketty missed.

The numbers look less catchy on a placard, but the real concern is the 0.1 percent. Thanks to the erosion of incomes for the vast majority, the 1 percent now includes doctors and even some university professors, neither of whom you are likely to see splashing out on private jets. The general assumption about capital was that it is re-invested into the real economy, for example, in the form of industrialists building new factories which create additional jobs and have service sectors spring up around them. Capital growth was best achieved through judicious capital expenditure. This certainly happened and still happens. However Piketty has observed a general trend for the increasing centralization of capital in fewer and fewer hands, leading to a disastrous scenario where a few dozen people can effectively buy the entire political process, and do so with an amount of wealth so small to them it would be akin to what you or I find between the couch cushions. According to Oxfam, in 2012 alone, the top hundred richest people on earth earned enough money to end world poverty four times over.13 It has only been in the last few years that we have even been able to visualise just how small such a group of people actually is. Regarding the most recent financial crisis, much of the vitriol has been directed at the banks as the cause of the meltdown. This is blaming the handgun rather than the gunman. Over the last three generations we have seen a huge shift in business and capital ownerships from independent operators into a centralised, transnational world. You only need to stroll down your main street to see this. The real story in the centralisation of wealth and power is in who owns the banks and the world’s largest corporations. These are called institutional investors and they include pension funds and other private pools of capital. They are the leviathans in the financial ocean and their movements trigger king tides. The largest thirty institutional shareholders of the top 299 corporations on earth own 51.4 percent of all shares. Of these thirty, only nine are sovereign governments or their wealth funds.14 In recent years, some complex system theorists working out of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich have calculated that 40 percent of the wealth in the global capitalist network is controlled by less than one percent of the companies within that same network; a super-entity of 147 corporations with interlocking boards of directors. Most of these were financial institutions and the top twenty included Barclays Bank, JP Morgan Chase, and Goldman Sachs.

The futility of protesting Bilderberg meetings or Bohemian Grove quickly becomes evident when you realise that trillions of dollars can be moved into and out of markets as a result of a single conference call of up to ten people. And that is more or less exactly what happens. Centralised capital can move very fast. This situation sets up a peculiar imbalance in incentives which favours the hugely wealthy at our expense. Firstly, there is the impact on tax revenue which has to be made up in what is left of the real economy. Half of all global trade now passes through tax havens and an estimated one third of the world’s wealth resides there permanently. In the mean time, you and I are left to pay for the roads and the schools from the declining income we make in an economy that has been drained of almost all capital investment now that it has been put to good use in Taiwan and Brazil. These incentives become even more bizarre when you consider pension funds, some of the largest institutional investors. Think on this. You spend your entire career paying money that you earned in America or Britain’s real economy into a pot that is then taken out of the country and invested in an emerging market … with the result that it destroys jobs in the economy you worked in, making everyone poorer and increasing your tax obligation as more people have to rely on social programmes. And why is this money taken out of the country? Because you want your pension fund to have the highest return on investment so that you can actually retire one day in a corner of the world that is now economically depressed as a result of this pooling of capital you contributed to your whole life. So do you want the companies your pension fund invested in paying more or less tax? If they pay less tax, you have a bigger pension, but you pay more for roads. Whether you call this a conspiracy or “just good business” is irrelevant because not only is it happening, but it sets the agenda for how you generate your own wealth. Because make no mistake, your pension fund currently cannot afford to pay out what it has promised you. To use a small change analogy, the baby boomers’ pension payout is a claim of one dollar a year on only fifteen cents in savings. It thus emerges that capitalism itself is not the problem. Far from it. Capitalism triggered the Great Enrichment and will go on to lift billions more out of poverty in developing countries in the coming five decades. It does however have a bug, and that bug’s name is centralization. Everyone is getting richer, but some people are getting rich faster than others. This process would be none of our business if it did not have huge political implications, which sadly it does. The board on which we hope to play the game of Life is set up and packed up based on which corner of the world promises the best return on capital for a few dozen unbelievably wealthy people. Actually being aware of this provides you with a strategic advantage in wealth generation and also in providing personal meaning. Pagans typically focus on preventing ecological debasement as a core spiritual activity, but the movement of capital is at the very heart of all this. Your pension funds are investing in energy companies that are burning down the Amazon so that they can pay you to retire in a corner of America that is being destroyed by fracking—depressing house prices and ruining your local ecosystem—
because that very same capital was not invested in local green energy infrastructure like wind or solar power down the road from you.

## Debasement

For most people living in the West, incomes have not grown in real terms for the last forty years. How is it then that an average income forty years ago could support an entire family, two cars, and property ownership? The answer is for the same reason that everyone thinks their houses have increased in value when they haven’t: inflation. I recall reading Archie comics as a child and marvelling at the cost Jughead would pay for his hamburgers … twenty-five cents! And a milkshake for a dime. Good luck finding a hamburger for twenty-five cents in an independent diner today. (And good luck finding an independent diner today.) It is a common misconception that inflation means prices going up. This is not so. Inflation, to borrow the definition from the Austrian School, is an increase in the money supply. Higher prices are just one potential result and a result that is typically unevenly distributed.

Increasing money does not flow evenly into the real economy but instead inflates particular assets … such as housing in the 2000s or dot-com companies in the 1990s. (Or it just sits as reserves in big banks, reducing the velocity and actually triggering deflation instead.) The dual effect of this increasing money supply is an erosion in normal savings/earning potential for middle economies and an increase in the value of assets those same people cannot typically afford, such as equities and investment properties. This means that the gap between the rich and poor actually gets wider as a side effect of the “normal” monetary policy that is supposed to be designed to boost the entire economy. This is why I will use the word debasement rather than inflation, because it more accurately captures the systemic impact of monetary policy on your life. The most important wealth creation step you can ever take is to come to grips with debasement and find ways to ameliorate it. How did we get into this situation in the first place? With the currencies of the world no longer fixed to a finite commodity—gold or silver—we create new money simply by printing it. (More accurately, someone enters a few more zeroes into a spreadsheet somewhere.)

Putting aside the Federal Reserve’s constitutionally dubious status as a private bank, it is important to realise that its primary purpose is to fund the government. Briefly, the Treasury works out how much money it needs to pay for the government’s various projects and then sells bonds to banks to cover this amount. Now the Treasury has the money the government needs and the banks have these bonds. So the banks take these bonds and sell them to the Federal Reserve. It is this act of a private bank selling a government document to the Federal Reserve that creates money. The Fed magics up the amount needed to buy the bonds from the banks, hey presto, money exists … and the banks have it. The Fed can also push the interest rates down further by purchasing bonds directly, which it has done in the past. A bond is a promise to pay back a loan of money plus a certain amount more at the end of an agreed term. But it is not like a loan that an individual may take out which requires some form of asset to borrow against. The government in question simply promises to pay the money back. This is why the international market uses bond sales and yields as a measure of confidence in a particular country’s economy or governance. If the market is uncertain about the government, the government in question drops the price of bonds and promises to pay back substantially more at the end of the term, which drives up the bond yield. Having the largest pool of potential buyers is a good thing for a government because the increase in demand means you don’t have to promise to pay back quite so much.

As a result, some fairly dubious policy decisions end up being implemented, such as laws being passed that classed government bonds as 100 percent “safe assets.” This incentivised large financial institutions to hold more of them as part of their minimum capital requirements needed to lend against. Yes, you read that right, banks can issue loans against government loans and call them assets. Like so many of the policies in this chapter, running a government debt based on money that is invented out of thin air worked quite well for a while. With a growing tax base from a low-unemployment, productive economy, it is a very good way to rapidly invest in infrastructure, education, and healthcare to further grow the productive economy which further grows your tax base. Inevitably, things went awry. People got elected on expensive promises, black budget spending grew, great chunks of the productive economy were offshored to developing markets … all of which reduced the tax base and increased government obligations through welfare and warfare. When these government promises (bonds) were due, it became easier at first to pay these out by issuing more promises rather than paying out of the tax haul.

Then it became essential. Government debt ballooned. Where government debt actually is like private debt is in the servicing of interest payments. When you borrow money, some portion of your income needs to be allocated to paying interest on your debt. We all know this from personal experience. The more you borrow, the larger the amount of your income needs to go to paying interest. If your income—or tax haul—does not grow faster than your interest payments, you have a very big problem. Do you know the fastest way to get out of debt when you control the money supply? Debasement. Printing more money—reducing the buying power of the dollar—allows someone to pay today’s debt in tomorrow’s reduced currency. If you borrow $100 today and spend it but that $100 is only worth $80 in three years, you are winning. When you combine this with keeping interest rates low you end up with what many people now call financial repression; which is keeping interest rates below the rate of inflation so governments can “inflate away” their debt. In the meantime, this exact same process erodes personal savings as they are worth less in the future. The money we are talking about is far from chump change. According to the 150-year-old Swiss insurer, Swiss Re, American savers have lost $470 billion in interest income since the 2008 financial crisis.16 Debasing the currency has other economic effects that benefit people who are not you or me. We are told that a weak dollar is important for export growth, but exports only account for around 10 percent of US GDP. A weak dollar allows for companies to inflate the value of their international profits which boosts stock prices. In fact, gradually debasing the value of the dollar means that stock prices and other assets appear more valuable without any underlying business improvement due simply to the Jughead hamburger effect. When you consider the fact that the bottom 90 percent of Americans own less than 20 percent of all stocks and mutual funds, it is quite clear who this policy helps the most and who it hurts the most.

The effect of these policies on the average person has been deliberately masked over the last twenty years. Have you ever had the experience of watching a news programme tell you that inflation is too low and trying to reconcile that with your experience at the grocery store? Well, you are right and they are lying. Since its inception right up until the early 1990s, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) measured the cost of living by checking the prices of an identical basket of goods over time, a practice dating back to the 1700s. However, in the second half of the twentieth century, academia became concerned that the measurement was inaccurate because it did not track consumer substitution for cheaper goods when one became more expensive such as swapping steak for chicken. As such, inflation may be overstated in what was measured and would lead to interest rate changes that may be unnecessary. Nothing was really done about this until the early 1990s when policy makers “suddenly” became concerned that the CPI was “inaccurate” because it did not allow substitution. Thanks largely to the efforts of Newt Gingrich and Alan Greenspan, the CPI began to be calculated with a marvellously technocratic term: “hedonic quality adjustment.” In real terms, this not only allowed for a substitution of steak for chicken, it allowed for buying less chicken, it assumed bulk-purchases of perishable items from discount outlets, and it changed the weight of foodstuffs. Essentially, it completely broke a two-hundred-year-old way of measuring the cost of living by allowing policy makers to gerrymander the rate of inflation to whatever they needed it to be. Why would anyone want to do this? Well, you will recall that it was in the 1990s that Greenspan poured vast amounts of cheap credit into the economy to inflate both a housing bubble and a tech bubble. You can only accomplish this by fully detaching your setting of interest rates from the real economy.

The secondary reason is even more insidious and was of particular interest to Gingrich. Pretending inflation was low allowed policy makers to claim that on-paper wage increases—which were a result of their own dollar printing—were “real.” This inflated more households into higher tax brackets and reduced Social Security payments as everyone was now “richer.” Let us put this all together. Policy is set based on the belief that you can technically swap out genetically modified chicken for dog food to feed your children in order to balance out continuous money printing and this means you are getting richer so you now pay more tax and receive less government support. But just have a look at the S&P 500, eh? Bringing it up to the present day, those spurious wage increases are not even happening. Median household income is down 7 percent since 2000. It is down substantially more when you strip the top 10 percent of households out of that number. In fact, the majority of Americans are now 40 percent poorer today than they were in 2007. According to Gabriel Zucman at UC Berkeley, almost half of Americans have zero wealth (their debts equal or exceed their assets). In the meantime, the top 16,000 families have 12 percent of it.17 Catherine Austin Fitts, former Undersecretary of Housing and Urban Development, regularly uses her tuna fish example to illustrate the effect of all this: each year a can of tuna costs 10 percent more, has 10 percent less tuna in it, and is 10 percent more likely to make you sick. Debasement in a can.
